According to Victor Basili from the University of Maryland,
iterative design can trace its roots to the 1930s when
Bell Labs implemented plan-do-study-act cycles of quality improvement.
Throughout the past 100 years,
different businesses have discovered and taken up methods of
iterative design without necessarily naming their practices as such.
A major step forward in the expansion of iterative design practices came with
the introduction of the spiral development model in the 1980s by Barry Boehm.
The spiral development model is a model of developing software.
It emphasizes the importance of designing and launching
small prototypes before developing and testing a final version of the software.
To begin, a software developer,
designer or a product manager would need to
determine the objectives for any upcoming project.
Boehm's model uses a spiral instead of
a cycle to emphasize that the level of commitment to
any new design should begin small and grow over time as ideas are validated with data.
Note in this example,
that the different rings in the circle are for Prototype 1, Prototype 2,
and operational prototype with actual development including coding and testing,
not taking place until the third time around the spiral development model.
Every pass through the spiral ends with planning for the next iteration,
which then returns the team to the beginning of the cycle where
objective identification and further building continues.
The modern era of iterative design, however,
didn't kick off until the late 1990s when a movement
began in the software industry to embrace more agile methods of design.
Before agile development, most software was developed in a waterfall style.
In the waterfall style,
product managers would completely plan out
all the details of a feature and document the specific feature needs.
Only after all parts of the feature were planned would
the design team create all designs and user flows.
Finally, the development team will be asked to implement the feature with
the exact specifications provided by the product and design team.
As each team needed to completely
finish their work before the next team could start working,
waterfall process took a long time.
Because no data was sought during creation,
finished products and features often failed to appeal to customers.
In the 1990s, software developers started to identify better ways of working.
They called this new method, agile development.
In 1993, Jeff Sutherland began running Scrum teams,
a specific method of agile development.
In contrast to waterfall,
Scrum emphasizes short periods of development followed by user feedback.
With Scrum, features and products are
iteratively designed in close connection with customers and
potential users so that a finished product
evolves naturally out of continuous collaboration.
In 2001, thought leaders on this new way of working published the "Agile Manifesto."
The manifesto declared that better products result from,
among other things, a focus on
customer collaboration and the culture that embraces change.
As part of the same movement to focus on customer voice in iterative processes,
Stanford School of Design began teaching design thinking in
2005 as the way to approach technical innovation.
Agile development processes, including Scrum and design thinking,
are now widely used across the software industry.
Indeed, in 2016, the Harvard Business Review
reported that the benefits of an iterative design process are so
appealing that the use of agile methods has begun to expand
outside of software and into other business domains as well.